# What are smart contracts?

Smart contracts are applications, software, that run on a distributed network with multiple validators all executing and validating the same code to ensure the application behaves as expected and there is no tampering in the execution of the program. This results in applications that you can trust because you can be certain the code that is being executed is always the same and will not change. This allows you to use smart contracts for applications where there's a trust issue. The rules of the smart contract define what the contract can and can not do making it a decentralized and predictable decision-maker.

Smart contracts are being used for all kinds of purposes but a recurring reason to use a smart contract is to automate certain actions without needing a centralized entity to enforce this specific action. A good example of this could be a smart contract that can exchange a certain amount of IOTA tokens for a certain amount of land ownership. The smart contract would accept both the IOTA tokens and the land ownership and will predictably exchange them between both parties without the risk of one of the parties not delivering on their promise. With a smart contract, code is law.

On a public blockchain, anyone willing to pay the fees for deploying a smart contract can deploy a smart contract. Once your smart contract has been deployed to the chain you no longer have the option to change it and you can be assured that your smart contract application will just be there as long as that blockchain exists. Smart contracts can communicate with one another and you can invoke programmed public functions on a smart contract to trigger actions on a smart contract or address the state of a smart contract.

Because smart contracts don't just run on a single computer when executed, but on many validators, a network of smart contracts can only process so many smart contracts at once even if the software has been written optimally; This means smart contracts are expensive to execute and don't scale well on a single blockchain often resulting in congested networks and expensive fees for executing functions on smart contracts. IOTA is changing this with ISCP by allowing many blockchains executing smart contracts to run in parallel and communicate with one another. 
