# Smart Contract Team Updates - Week 44, 2021

- Last week we evaluated the release of the Smart Contracts Beta and fixed various issues encountered while people tried it out on the testnet. One of the main conclusions coming from this is that we need to further improve our logging to more easily debug any issues, improve the reliability of our testnet and improve the Wasp node software to better handle any kind of edge-case. Many of these issues have already been improved throughout the week and we started a workgroup within the team to focus on resolving all of these issues in the months to come.

- The state of smart contract chains has to be recoverable at all times regardless of what happens. With the learnings from the testnet we decided to add additional functionality to the node software and tooling to ensure this is always the case. This is one of the tasks the new workgroup will be focussing on next to chain administration and governance. We will refer to this as the `admin tooling workgroup` from now on.

- Next to the admin tooling workgroup another part of the team will be forming another workgroup focussing on the migration to Chrysalis with the tokenization framework and all the changes that come with that. We'll refer to this as the `VM workgroup` from now on. Both workgroups will be cancelled again once they finalized their implementations and new workgroups will be formed after that for some of the bigger follow-up tasks.

- Due to the huge success of the testnet and the first NFT drop on it some changes to the infrastructure of the testnet have been scheduled to handle higher peak loads better which should result in a more reliable experience at these peak moments on the testnet. 

- The team is currently defining and dividing all individual tasks which are deliverables for the next release of IOTA Smart Contracts. Most of these tasks will fall under the workgroups and will be aimed at supporting the Chrysalis network by adding compatibility with Hornet and Bee, together with the tokenization framework integration, improved EVM support and improved reliability and tooling.

- On the research end we are current looking at simulations for improving the performance of the gossip/dissemination part of off-ledger requests between the chain validator- and access nodes. Next to that we are also looking at other protocols for inspiration and validation of our concepts. Dynamic committees is a longer term ongoing research project that is worked on in parallel to this.

- The initial content for the IOTA Smart Contracts whitepaper is now complete and is pending a cleanup and review before it's being released to the public.

- The AssemblyScript (TypeScript) support for our Webassembly based smart contract has been completely integrated including support for it in the schema tool and documented making this the third supported language for our Wasm based smart contracts, you can use this now on our `develop` branch. This should lower the barrier to entry for people without Go or Rust experience by offering a familiar TypeScript interface as well. The schema tool has been improved as well to better structure the generated code for a better overview while developing (each generated language stub now has it's own folder for clarity).

- The EVM-Light implementation (a more efficient alternative implementation of EVM) has been merged into the `develop` branch as well and can now be tested. You can pick between an EVM-Light and a traditional EVM chain now and we encourage everyone developing using EVM on IOTA Smart Contracts to test this implementation out as well and report back to us if any problems are encountered while using this. Next to this we are still working on implementing predictable block intervals on the EVM chains which is not a very trivial thing to solve elegantly. 

- Additional metrics to Wasp (calculating block sizes) have been added this week for integration into our Promotheus/Grafana based metrics platform.

- The RFCs for the new Tokenization framework and dust protection have been reviewed internally and will, after some polishing, be released for a public review as well.
