documentation/docs/guide/schema/usage.mdx, before:

---
keywords:
- functions
- schema tool
- definition file
- Rust
- Go
- init
- json
- yml
description: The `schema` tool will assist in creating a smart contract unobtrusively as possible.
image: /img/logo/WASP_logo_dark.png
---
import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs"
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem"

# Using the Schema Tool

We tried to make the creation of smart contracts as simple as possible. The `schema`
tool will assist you along the way as unobtrusively as possible. This section will walk you
through the steps to create a new smart contract from scratch.

First, you need to decide on a central folder where you want to keep all your smart
contracts. Each smart contract you create will be maintained in a separate subfolder in
this folder. We will use certain naming conventions that the schema tool expects
throughout this section. First we will select a camel case name for our smart contract.
For our example, `MySmartContract`.

Once you know what your smart contract will be named, it is time to set up your subfolder.
Simply navigate to the central smart contract folder, and run the schema tool's
initialization function:

```shell
schema -init MySmartContract
```

This command will create a subfolder named `mysmartcontract` and generate an initial YAML
schema definition file inside this subfolder. Because a YAML file is easier to read and
edit manually, YAML is the default configuration file over JSON. If you prefer to use JSON
instead, you can run the schema tool like this:

```shell
schema -init MySmartContract -type=json
```

Note that the generated subfolder name is all lower case. This is due to best practices
for package names in most languages. The generated schema definition file looks like
this:

<Tabs defaultValue="yaml"
      values={[
          {label: 'schema.yaml', value: 'yaml'},
          {label: 'schema.json', value: 'json'},
      ]}>

<TabItem value="json">

```json
{
  "name": "MySmartContract",
  "description": "MySmartContract description",
  "events": {}
  "structs": {},
  "typedefs": {},
  "state": {
    "owner": "AgentID // current owner of this smart contract"
  },
  "funcs": {
    "init": {
      "params": {
        "owner": "AgentID? // optional owner of this smart contract"
      }
    },
    "setOwner": {
      "access": "owner // current owner of this smart contract",
      "params": {
        "owner": "AgentID // new owner of this smart contract"
      }
    }
  },
  "views": {
    "getOwner": {
      "results": {
        "owner": "AgentID // current owner of this smart contract"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="yaml">

```yaml
name: MySmartContract
description: MySmartContract description
events: {}
structs: {}
typedefs: {}
state:
  owner: AgentID // current owner of this smart contract
funcs:
  init:
    params:
      owner: AgentID? // optional owner of this smart contract
  setOwner:
    access: owner // current owner of this smart contract
    params:
      owner: AgentID // new owner of this smart contract
views:
  getOwner:
    results:
      owner: AgentID // current owner of this smart contract
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

The schema definition file has been pre-populated with all sections that you could need,
and some functions that allow you to maintain the ownership of the smart contract. Now
that the schema definition file exists, it is up to you to modify it further to reflect
the requirements of your smart contract.

You should use camel case naming convention throughout the schema definition file when
naming items. Function and variable names always start with a lower case character, and
type names always start with an upper case character.

The first thing you may want to do is to modify the `description` field to something more
sensible. And if you already know how to use the schema tool, then now is the moment to
fill out some sections with the definitions you know you will need.

The next step is to go into the new `mysmartcontract` subfolder and run the schema tool
there to generate the initial code for the desired language:

<Tabs defaultValue="go"
      groupId="language"
      values={[
          {label: 'Go', value: 'go'},
          {label: 'Rust', value: 'rust'},
          {label: 'TypeScript', value: 'ts'},
      ]}>

<TabItem value="go">

If you want to generate Go code, you should run the schema tool with the
`-go` option like this:

```shell
schema -go
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="rust">

If you want to generate Rust code, you should run the schema tool with the
`-rust` option like this:

```shell
schema -rust
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ts">

If you want to generate TypeScript code, you should run the schema tool with the
`-ts` option like this:

```shell
schema -ts
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

If you want to generate more than one language your can simply specify multiple options.
For example, to generate both Rust and Go code you would specify both options like this:

```shell
schema -rust -go
```

Note that the schema tool will automatically determine the type of the schema definition
file (YAML or JSON) by its file extension.

The schema tool will generate a complete set of source files for the desired language(s),
that will compile successfully into a Wasm code file. You compile these as follows:

<Tabs defaultValue="go"
      groupId="language"
      values={[
          {label: 'Go', value: 'go'},
          {label: 'Rust', value: 'rust'},
          {label: 'TypeScript', value: 'ts'},
      ]}>

<TabItem value="go">

```shell
tinygo build -target wasm wasmmain/main.go
```

This will use the Go source files in the current folder. The only file in this folder that
you should edit manually is `mysmartcontract.go`. All other files will be regenerated and
overwritten whenever the schema tool is run again.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="rust">

After generating the Rust code, you should first modify the Cargo.toml file to your
liking, and potentially add the new project to a Rust workspace. Cargo.toml will not be
regenerated once it already exists. Then build the code as follows:

```shell
wasm-pack build
```

This will use the `src` subfolder that contains all Rust source files. The only file in
this folder that you should edit manually is `mysmartcontract.rs`. All other files will be
regenerated and overwritten whenever the schema tool is run again.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ts">

```shell
asc lib.ts --binaryFile output_ts.wasm --lib path/to/node_modules
```

This will use the TypeScript source files in the current folder. The only file in this
folder that you should edit manually is `mysmartcontract.ts`. All other files will be
regenerated and overwritten whenever the schema tool is run again.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

The generated code is essentially identical for each language, barring some language
idiosyncrasy differences. Just view different language files with the same name next to,
each other, and you will see what we mean.

Here is an example of the initially generated code, `mysmartcontract.xx`
looks like this before you even start modifying it:

<Tabs defaultValue="go"
      groupId="language"
      values={[
          {label: 'Go', value: 'go'},
          {label: 'Rust', value: 'rust'},
          {label: 'TypeScript', value: 'ts'},
      ]}>

<TabItem value="go">

```go
package mysmartcontract

import "github.com/iotaledger/wasp/packages/wasmvm/wasmlib"


func funcInit(ctx wasmlib.ScFuncContext, f *InitContext) {
    if f.Params.Owner().Exists() {
        f.State.Owner().SetValue(f.Params.Owner().Value())
        return
    }
    f.State.Owner().SetValue(ctx.RequestSender())
}

func funcSetOwner(ctx wasmlib.ScFuncContext, f *SetOwnerContext) {
    f.State.Owner().SetValue(f.Params.Owner().Value())
}

func viewGetOwner(ctx wasmlib.ScViewContext, f *GetOwnerContext) {
    f.Results.Owner().SetValue(f.State.Owner().Value())
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="rust">

```rust
use wasmlib::*;

use crate::*;

pub fn func_init(ctx: &ScFuncContext, f: &InitContext) {
    if f.params.owner().exists() {
        f.state.owner().set_value(&f.params.owner().value());
        return;
    }
    f.state.owner().set_value(&ctx.request_sender());
}

pub fn func_set_owner(_ctx: &ScFuncContext, f: &SetOwnerContext) {
    f.state.owner().set_value(&f.params.owner().value());
}

pub fn view_get_owner(_ctx: &ScViewContext, f: &GetOwnerContext) {
    f.results.owner().set_value(&f.state.owner().value());
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ts">

```ts
import * as wasmlib from "wasmlib"
import * as sc from "./index";

export function funcInit(ctx: wasmlib.ScFuncContext, f: sc.InitContext): void {
    if (f.params.owner().exists()) {
        f.state.owner().setValue(f.params.owner().value());
        return;
    }
    f.state.owner().setValue(ctx.requestSender());
}

export function funcSetOwner(ctx: wasmlib.ScFuncContext, f: sc.SetOwnerContext): void {
    f.state.owner().setValue(f.params.owner().value());
}

export function viewGetOwner(ctx: wasmlib.ScViewContext, f: sc.GetOwnerContext): void {
    f.results.owner().setValue(f.state.owner().value());
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

As you can see the schema tool generated an initial working version of the functions that
are used to maintain the smart contract owner that will suffice for most cases.

For a smooth building experience it is a good idea to set up a build rule in your build
environment that runs the schema tool with the required parameters whenever the schema
definition file changes. That way regeneration of files is automatic, and you no longer
have to start the schema tool manually each time after changing the schema definition
file. The schema tool will only regenerate the code when it finds that the schema
definition file has been modified since the last time it generated the code. You can force
the schema tool to regenerate all code by adding the `-force` flag to its command line
parameter.

In the next section we will look at how a smart contract uses
[Structured Data Types](structs.mdx).

## Video Tutorial

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/aTwXHuzwqZ0" title="Deploying with Schema Tool" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### Creating Smart Contracts using AssemblyScript

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/P5HMgmY3DMM" title="Creating Smart Contracts using AssemblyScript" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Commit message:

refactor: Enforce schema init param alphanumeric

documentation/docs/guide/schema/usage.mdx, after:

---
keywords:
- functions
- schema tool
- definition file
- Rust
- Go
- init
- json
- yml
description: The `schema` tool will assist in creating a smart contract unobtrusively as possible.
image: /img/logo/WASP_logo_dark.png
---
import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs"
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem"

# Using the Schema Tool

We tried to make the creation of smart contracts as simple as possible. The `schema`
tool will assist you along the way as unobtrusively as possible. This section will walk you
through the steps to create a new smart contract from scratch.

First, you need to decide on a central folder where you want to keep all your smart
contracts. Each smart contract you create will be maintained in a separate subfolder in
this folder. We will use certain naming conventions that the schema tool expects
throughout this section, and the name should be alphanumeric or `_`.
 First we will select a camel case name for our smart contract.
For our example, `MySmartContract`.

Once you know what your smart contract will be named, it is time to set up your subfolder.
Simply navigate to the central smart contract folder, and run the schema tool's
initialization function:

```shell
schema -init MySmartContract
```

This command will create a subfolder named `mysmartcontract` and generate an initial YAML
schema definition file inside this subfolder. Because a YAML file is easier to read and
edit manually, YAML is the default configuration file over JSON. If you prefer to use JSON
instead, you can run the schema tool like this:

```shell
schema -init MySmartContract -type=json
```

Note that the generated subfolder name is all lower case. This is due to best practices
for package names in most languages. The generated schema definition file looks like
this:

<Tabs defaultValue="yaml"
      values={[
          {label: 'schema.yaml', value: 'yaml'},
          {label: 'schema.json', value: 'json'},
      ]}>

<TabItem value="json">

```json
{
  "name": "MySmartContract",
  "description": "MySmartContract description",
  "events": {}
  "structs": {},
  "typedefs": {},
  "state": {
    "owner": "AgentID // current owner of this smart contract"
  },
  "funcs": {
    "init": {
      "params": {
        "owner": "AgentID? // optional owner of this smart contract"
      }
    },
    "setOwner": {
      "access": "owner // current owner of this smart contract",
      "params": {
        "owner": "AgentID // new owner of this smart contract"
      }
    }
  },
  "views": {
    "getOwner": {
      "results": {
        "owner": "AgentID // current owner of this smart contract"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="yaml">

```yaml
name: MySmartContract
description: MySmartContract description
events: {}
structs: {}
typedefs: {}
state:
  owner: AgentID // current owner of this smart contract
funcs:
  init:
    params:
      owner: AgentID? // optional owner of this smart contract
  setOwner:
    access: owner // current owner of this smart contract
    params:
      owner: AgentID // new owner of this smart contract
views:
  getOwner:
    results:
      owner: AgentID // current owner of this smart contract
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

The schema definition file has been pre-populated with all sections that you could need,
and some functions that allow you to maintain the ownership of the smart contract. Now
that the schema definition file exists, it is up to you to modify it further to reflect
the requirements of your smart contract.

You should use camel case naming convention throughout the schema definition file when
naming items. Function and variable names always start with a lower case character, and
type names always start with an upper case character.

The first thing you may want to do is to modify the `description` field to something more
sensible. And if you already know how to use the schema tool, then now is the moment to
fill out some sections with the definitions you know you will need.

The next step is to go into the new `mysmartcontract` subfolder and run the schema tool
there to generate the initial code for the desired language:

<Tabs defaultValue="go"
      groupId="language"
      values={[
          {label: 'Go', value: 'go'},
          {label: 'Rust', value: 'rust'},
          {label: 'TypeScript', value: 'ts'},
      ]}>

<TabItem value="go">

If you want to generate Go code, you should run the schema tool with the
`-go` option like this:

```shell
schema -go
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="rust">

If you want to generate Rust code, you should run the schema tool with the
`-rust` option like this:

```shell
schema -rust
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ts">

If you want to generate TypeScript code, you should run the schema tool with the
`-ts` option like this:

```shell
schema -ts
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

If you want to generate more than one language your can simply specify multiple options.
For example, to generate both Rust and Go code you would specify both options like this:

```shell
schema -rust -go
```

Note that the schema tool will automatically determine the type of the schema definition
file (YAML or JSON) by its file extension.

The schema tool will generate a complete set of source files for the desired language(s),
that will compile successfully into a Wasm code file. You compile these as follows:

<Tabs defaultValue="go"
      groupId="language"
      values={[
          {label: 'Go', value: 'go'},
          {label: 'Rust', value: 'rust'},
          {label: 'TypeScript', value: 'ts'},
      ]}>

<TabItem value="go">

```shell
tinygo build -target wasm wasmmain/main.go
```

This will use the Go source files in the current folder. The only file in this folder that
you should edit manually is `mysmartcontract.go`. All other files will be regenerated and
overwritten whenever the schema tool is run again.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="rust">

After generating the Rust code, you should first modify the Cargo.toml file to your
liking, and potentially add the new project to a Rust workspace. Cargo.toml will not be
regenerated once it already exists. Then build the code as follows:

```shell
wasm-pack build
```

This will use the `src` subfolder that contains all Rust source files. The only file in
this folder that you should edit manually is `mysmartcontract.rs`. All other files will be
regenerated and overwritten whenever the schema tool is run again.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ts">

```shell
asc lib.ts --binaryFile output_ts.wasm --lib path/to/node_modules
```

This will use the TypeScript source files in the current folder. The only file in this
folder that you should edit manually is `mysmartcontract.ts`. All other files will be
regenerated and overwritten whenever the schema tool is run again.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

The generated code is essentially identical for each language, barring some language
idiosyncrasy differences. Just view different language files with the same name next to,
each other, and you will see what we mean.

Here is an example of the initially generated code, `mysmartcontract.xx`
looks like this before you even start modifying it:

<Tabs defaultValue="go"
      groupId="language"
      values={[
          {label: 'Go', value: 'go'},
          {label: 'Rust', value: 'rust'},
          {label: 'TypeScript', value: 'ts'},
      ]}>

<TabItem value="go">

```go
package mysmartcontract

import "github.com/iotaledger/wasp/packages/wasmvm/wasmlib"


func funcInit(ctx wasmlib.ScFuncContext, f *InitContext) {
    if f.Params.Owner().Exists() {
        f.State.Owner().SetValue(f.Params.Owner().Value())
        return
    }
    f.State.Owner().SetValue(ctx.RequestSender())
}

func funcSetOwner(ctx wasmlib.ScFuncContext, f *SetOwnerContext) {
    f.State.Owner().SetValue(f.Params.Owner().Value())
}

func viewGetOwner(ctx wasmlib.ScViewContext, f *GetOwnerContext) {
    f.Results.Owner().SetValue(f.State.Owner().Value())
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="rust">

```rust
use wasmlib::*;

use crate::*;

pub fn func_init(ctx: &ScFuncContext, f: &InitContext) {
    if f.params.owner().exists() {
        f.state.owner().set_value(&f.params.owner().value());
        return;
    }
    f.state.owner().set_value(&ctx.request_sender());
}

pub fn func_set_owner(_ctx: &ScFuncContext, f: &SetOwnerContext) {
    f.state.owner().set_value(&f.params.owner().value());
}

pub fn view_get_owner(_ctx: &ScViewContext, f: &GetOwnerContext) {
    f.results.owner().set_value(&f.state.owner().value());
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ts">

```ts
import * as wasmlib from "wasmlib"
import * as sc from "./index";

export function funcInit(ctx: wasmlib.ScFuncContext, f: sc.InitContext): void {
    if (f.params.owner().exists()) {
        f.state.owner().setValue(f.params.owner().value());
        return;
    }
    f.state.owner().setValue(ctx.requestSender());
}

export function funcSetOwner(ctx: wasmlib.ScFuncContext, f: sc.SetOwnerContext): void {
    f.state.owner().setValue(f.params.owner().value());
}

export function viewGetOwner(ctx: wasmlib.ScViewContext, f: sc.GetOwnerContext): void {
    f.results.owner().setValue(f.state.owner().value());
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

As you can see the schema tool generated an initial working version of the functions that
are used to maintain the smart contract owner that will suffice for most cases.

For a smooth building experience it is a good idea to set up a build rule in your build
environment that runs the schema tool with the required parameters whenever the schema
definition file changes. That way regeneration of files is automatic, and you no longer
have to start the schema tool manually each time after changing the schema definition
file. The schema tool will only regenerate the code when it finds that the schema
definition file has been modified since the last time it generated the code. You can force
the schema tool to regenerate all code by adding the `-force` flag to its command line
parameter.

In the next section we will look at how a smart contract uses
[Structured Data Types](structs.mdx).

## Video Tutorial

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/aTwXHuzwqZ0" title="Deploying with Schema Tool" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### Creating Smart Contracts using AssemblyScript

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/P5HMgmY3DMM" title="Creating Smart Contracts using AssemblyScript" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
