packages/vm/core/evm/README.md, before:

# EVM support

This package and subpackages contain the code for the `evm`
core contract, which allows to execute Ethereum VM (EVM) code on top of the
ISC chain, thus adding support for Ethereum smart contracts.

The `evm` contract stores the current EVM state in raw form, and
after running an Ethereum transaction, it:

- Updates the EVM state
- Stores the transaction and receipt for future reference. Only the latest N
  transactions/receipts are stored, to avoid using unlimited space.

## JSON-RPC

The `wasp-cli chain evm jsonrpc` command to start a JSON-RPC server. This will
allow you to connect any standard Ethereum tool, like Metamask.

Note: Existing EVM tools that expect a 'real' Ethereum blockchain might not
be compatible with the current implementation of `evm`. YMMV.

## Complete example using `wasp-cluster`

In terminal #1, start a cluster:

```
wasp-cluster start -d
```

In terminal #2:

```
# initialize a private key and request some funds
wasp-cli init
wasp-cli request-funds

# deploy an ISC chain, deposit some funds to be used for gas fees
wasp-cli chain deploy --chain=mychain --committee=0,1,2,3 --quorum 3
wasp-cli chain deposit IOTA:10000
```

Finally we start the JSON-RPC server:

```
wasp-cli chain evm jsonrpc
```

## Predictable block time

Some EVM contracts depend on blocks being minted periodically with regular
intervals. ISC does not support that natively, so by default a new EVM block
is minted every time an ISC batch is executed that contains at least one EVM
transaction. In other words, by default no EVM blocks will be minted until an
EVM transaction is received.

However, the `evm` contract supports emulating predictable block times. To
enable this feature, add `--evm-block-time <n>` to the `wasp-cli chain deploy`
command, where `<n>` is the desired average amount of seconds between blocks.

Note that this may change the behavior of JSON-RPC functions that query the
EVM state (e.g. `getBalance`), since `evm` is not able to store the state
in both the latest minted block and the pending block. These functions will
always return the state computed after accepting the latest transaction (i.e.
the state of the pending block).

Commit message:

fix(evm): revert ISC request if evm execution was reverted

packages/vm/core/evm/README.md, after:

# EVM support

This package and subpackages contain the code for the `evm`
core contract, which allows to execute Ethereum VM (EVM) code on top of the
ISC chain, thus adding support for Ethereum smart contracts.

The `evm` contract stores the current EVM state in raw form, and
after running an Ethereum transaction, it:

- Updates the EVM state
- Stores the transaction and receipt for future reference. Only the latest N
  transactions/receipts are stored, to avoid using unlimited space.

## JSON-RPC

The `wasp-cli chain evm jsonrpc` command to start a JSON-RPC server. This will
allow you to connect any standard Ethereum tool, like Metamask.

Note: Existing EVM tools that expect a 'real' Ethereum blockchain might not
be compatible with the current implementation of `evm`. Some examples:

- Ethereum blocks are kept only to provide compatibility, but they do not
  actually form a 'real' blockchain, and the EVM state is not actually stored
  in a Merkle tree (since the ISC layer already takes care of all of this, it
  would be inefficient to do that at the EVM layer as well). As a consequence,
  some attributes of the blocks will show dummy values (e.g. `stateRoot`,
  `nonce`, etc).

- If a transaction is reverted, in Ethereum a receipt is generated with
  `status = failed`. In ISC, the corresponding ISC request will
  also be reverted, generating no Ethereum receipt (the ISC receipt will
  still be generated).

## Complete example using `wasp-cluster`

In terminal #1, start a cluster:

```
wasp-cluster start -d
```

In terminal #2:

```
# initialize a private key and request some funds
wasp-cli init
wasp-cli request-funds

# deploy an ISC chain, deposit some funds to be used for gas fees
wasp-cli chain deploy --chain=mychain --committee=0,1,2,3 --quorum 3
wasp-cli chain deposit IOTA:10000
```

Finally we start the JSON-RPC server:

```
wasp-cli chain evm jsonrpc
```

## Predictable block time

Some EVM contracts depend on blocks being minted periodically with regular
intervals. ISC does not support that natively, so by default a new EVM block
is minted every time an ISC batch is executed that contains at least one EVM
transaction. In other words, by default no EVM blocks will be minted until an
EVM transaction is received.

However, the `evm` contract supports emulating predictable block times. To
enable this feature, add `--evm-block-time <n>` to the `wasp-cli chain deploy`
command, where `<n>` is the desired average amount of seconds between blocks.

Note that this may change the behavior of JSON-RPC functions that query the
EVM state (e.g. `getBalance`), since `evm` is not able to store the state
in both the latest minted block and the pending block. These functions will
always return the state computed after accepting the latest transaction (i.e.
the state of the pending block).
