# Exploring IOTA Smart Contracts

Previous: [Tokens and the Value Tangle](02.md)

## Creating a chain. Core contacts
In a test we can deploy one or several chains, deploy smart contracts in it and invoke smart contracts. 

In the above example `TestSolo1`, the statement `chain := env.NewChain(nil, "ex1")` 
creates and deploys a new chain in the environment of test, named `ex1`. 
Several chain may be deployed on the test.  
(see also Annex. [Structure of the chain]).  

The deploying a chain automatically means deployment of all 4 core smart contracts on it.
The core contracts are responsible for the vital functions of the chain and provide infrastructure 
for all other smart contracts. They are:

- `root` contract. 
Responsible for the initialization of the chain, contains the main parameters of the chain, 
maintains the registry of deployed contracts,
handles fees and performs other functions. See [`root` contract](root.md).

- `accounts` contract. 
Responsible for the on-chain ledger of accounts. 
The on-chain accounts contain colored tokens, which are controlled by smart 
contracts and owners of addresses on the Value Tangle. See [`accounts` contract](accounts.md).

- `blob` contract. 
Responsible for the immutable registry of binary objects of arbitrary size. 
One blob is a collection of named binary chunks of data. 
A blob can be used for example to store wasm binaries, needed to deploy wasm smart contracts. 
Each blob in the registry is referenced by its hash which is deterministically calculated from data. 
See [`blob` contract](blob.md)

- `eventlog` contract. 
Keeps an immutable log of events in the chain. An event is a message 
published by smart contracts with the `Event()` sandbox call. 
Events contain arbitrary strings which are emitted (published) 
over the Wasp node publisher for consumption of outside subscribers. 
All events also are immutably stored in the event log on the chain with the timestamp and id 
of the smart contract which emitted the event. 
Important events such as the deployment of a new smart contract or processing 
of requests are emitted as events by the chain's core. 
See [`eventlog` contract](eventlog.md).

## Writing and compiling first Rust smart contract
In this section we will create a new smart contract. 
We will write its code in Rust then will use the `wasplib` library and `wasm-pack` 
to compile it into WebAssembly (_wasm_) binary. 

Note that this tutorial is not a tutorial of the ISCP smart contract development environment: 
for that we will provide other tutorials. 
The only goal of these examples is an introduction to fundamental principles of ISCP smart contracts.

We assume you already have Rust and `wasm-pack` [installed](https://rustwasm.github.io/wasm-pack/installer/). 
To get the `wasplib` library, please clone the [github.com/iotaledger/wasplib](https://github.com/iotaledger/wasplib) 
repository. 

We will be using the examples located in the 
[wasplib/rust/contracts/examples](http://github.com/iotaledger/wasplib/tree/develop/rust/contracts/examples)  
directory. 

The `example1` smart contract is a simple smart contract which stores a string in its state upon request and allows to 
retrieve the stored string by calling a view. 

```rust
use wasplib::client::*;
#[no_mangle]
fn on_load() {
    // declare entry points of the smart contract
    let exports = ScExports::new();
    exports.add_call("storeString", store_string);
    exports.add_view("getString", get_string);
}

// storeString entry point
fn store_string(ctx: &ScCallContext) {
    // take parameter paramString
    let par = ctx.params().get_string("paramString");
    if !par.exists(){
        ctx.panic("string parameter not found") // panic if parameter does not exist
    }
    // store the string in "storedString" variable
    ctx.state().get_string("storedString").set_value(&par.value());
    // log the text
    let msg = "Message stored: ".to_string() + &par.value();
    ctx.log(&msg);
}

// getString view
fn get_string(ctx: &ScViewContext) {
    // take the stored string
    let s = ctx.state().get_string("storedString").value();
    // return the string value in the result dictionary
    ctx.results().get_string("paramString").set_value(&s);
}
```

Running the `wasp-pack build` command will produce something like this:
```
[INFO]: Checking for the Wasm target...
[INFO]: Compiling to Wasm...
   Compiling example1 v0.1.0 ([..]]\wasplib\rust\contracts\examples\example1)
    Finished release [optimized] target(s) in 1.21s
[INFO]: License key is set in Cargo.toml but no LICENSE file(s) were found; Please add the LICENSE file(s) to your project directory
[INFO]: Installing wasm-bindgen...
[INFO]: Optimizing wasm binaries with `wasm-opt`...
[INFO]: :-) Done in 3.94s
[INFO]: :-) Your wasm pkg is ready to publish at [..]]\wasplib\rust\contracts\examples\example1\pkg.
```

The 28KB file `example1_bg.wasm` is the binary of the smart contract we will be using in further examples. 
The file contains everything needed to deploy the smart contract on a chain run by the Wasp network.

Next: [Deploying and running Rust smart contract](04.md)