# Exploring IOTA Smart Contracts

## The _Solo_ package
Solo is a Go package to write tests for IOTA smart contracts. 
It allows the deployment of ISCP chains and smart contracts. It also provides a toolkit for interaction 
with smart contracts, for manipulation of tokens and ledger accounts in an environment that is almost 
identical to the distributed multi-chain environment of the ISCP. 

The `Solo` package and its `GoDoc` link [can be found here](../../packages/solo/readme.md). 
The GoDocs provides a reference to all Solo calls which can be used in tests (not necessarily covered in this tutorial). 

Smart contracts are notoriously isolated from the outside world. 
The effect of the user interaction with a smart contract is normally only observed in its state change. 
The approach in this tutorial is to explain all main concepts of ISCP development through 
loading smart contracts into the _Solo_ tests, invoking its functions and examining state changes.

ISCP is currently in active development, so things change and are less than perfect. 
In the current stage the ISCP software is experimental. 
We expect feedback from the community about hands-on experience. 
We also expect contribution to the development of ISCP itself, including Rust/Wasm development environment 
or, possibly, alternative VM implementations. 

_Solo_ is not a toy environment. It allows developers to develop and test real smart contracts and 
entire inter-chain protocols before deploying them on the distributed network.

Please follow [the link](install.md) for installation instructions.

## First example
The following is an example of a _Solo_ test. 
It deploys a new chain and invokes a function in the `root` contract. 

The `root` contract always exists on any chain. 
So for this example there is no need to deploy any new contract.
The test log to the testing output the main parameters of the chain, lists names and IDs of all four core contracts.

```go
func TestTutorial1(t *testing.T) {
	env := solo.New(t, false, false)
	chain := env.NewChain(nil, "ex1")

	chainInfo, coreContracts := chain.GetInfo()   // calls view root::GetInfo
	require.EqualValues(t, 4, len(coreContracts)) // 4 core contracts deployed by default

	t.Logf("chainID: %s", chainInfo.ChainID)
	t.Logf("chain owner ID: %s", chainInfo.ChainOwnerID)
	for hname, rec := range coreContracts {
		t.Logf("    Core contract '%s': %s", rec.Name, coretypes.NewContractID(chain.ChainID, hname))
	}
}
```

The output of the test will be something like this:

```
=== RUN   TestTutorial1
18:47.411	INFO	TestTutorial1	solo/solo.go:160	deploying new chain 'ex1'
18:47.415	INFO	TestTutorial1.ex1	vmcontext/runreq.go:179	eventlog -> '[req] [0]CziZYb8ZkqwgftQ9Am8sz2GTM3EEevWHGSVfuzx74Wan: Ok'
18:47.416	INFO	TestTutorial1.ex1	solo/run.go:82	state transition #0 --> #1. Requests in the block: 1. Posted: 0
18:47.416	INFO	TestTutorial1	solo/clock.go:44	ClockStep: logical clock advanced by 1ms
18:47.416	INFO	TestTutorial1.ex1	solo/solo.go:240	chain 'ex1' deployed. Chain ID: Qu74LELWVfhFD8QroZoZDicVNWQ1WudWhU7PS9Serkuf
18:47.416	INFO	TestTutorial1.ex1	solo/req.go:172	callView: root::getChainInfo
    tutorial_test.go:21: chainID: Qu74LELWVfhFD8QroZoZDicVNWQ1WudWhU7PS9Serkuf
    tutorial_test.go:22: chain owner ID: A/MRVBJxYjreRDiEaAYNKaoHMS8y4DPZKHHJNxf2fP7zxb
    tutorial_test.go:24:     Core contract 'eventlog': Qu74LELWVfhFD8QroZoZDicVNWQ1WudWhU7PS9Serkuf::661aa7d8
    tutorial_test.go:24:     Core contract 'blob': Qu74LELWVfhFD8QroZoZDicVNWQ1WudWhU7PS9Serkuf::fd91bc63
    tutorial_test.go:24:     Core contract 'root': Qu74LELWVfhFD8QroZoZDicVNWQ1WudWhU7PS9Serkuf::cebf5908
    tutorial_test.go:24:     Core contract 'accounts': Qu74LELWVfhFD8QroZoZDicVNWQ1WudWhU7PS9Serkuf::3c4b5e02
--- PASS: TestTutorial1 (0.01s)
```
The 4 core contracts listed in the log (`root`, `accounts`, `blob`, `eventlog`) 
are automatically deployed on each new chain. You can see them listed in the test log together with their _contract IDs_.
 
The output fragment in the log `state transition #0 --> #1` means the state of the chain has changed from block 
index 0 (the origin index of the empty state) to block index 1. 
The state #0 is the empty origin state, the #1 always contains all core smart contracts deployed on the chain as well as other 
variables of chain, such as _chainID_ and _chain owner ID_.

The _chainID_ and _chain owner ID_ are respectively ID of the deployed 
chain `Ygtcnzs4zHF3Ao9i5FytNT5oYykUvYtuJSSANuxohcoo` and the address (in the form of _agent ID_) 
from which the chain was deployed: `A/RxRUJAcHajNX1A3bFBdECxQVkNwELTnPfU7aNboEz9hN`
(the prefix `A/` indicates that the chain owner is an address, not a smart contract).
 
Next: [Tokens and the Value Tangle](02.md)