# Exploring IOTA Smart Contracts

Previous: [Exploring IOTA Smart Contracts](01.md)

 ## Tokens and the Value Tangle
 The Pollen release of the Goshimmer node implements the _Value Tangle_, 
 a distributed ledger of tokens. We won't go into the detail of the Value Tangle. The introduction 
 of it can be found [here](../intro/utxo.md). We only have to know that Value Tangle contains
 balances of colored tokens locked in addresses, like this: 
 ```
Address: Yk85765qdrwheQ4udj6RihxtPxudTSWF9qYe4NsAfp6K
    IOTA: 1000
    Red: 15
    Green: 200
```
where `IOTA` is the color code of IOTA tokens and `Red` and `Green` are other color codes 
([color codes are 32-byte hashes, as defined by Goshimmer](https://github.com/iotaledger/goshimmer/blob/87d0cbb172c1b3432b1dddcbabacd76cad66f1f3/dapps/valuetransfers/packages/balance/color.go#L10)). 
Tokens can only be moved on the _Value Tangle_ by the private key of the corresponding address. 

(In this tutorial we will use `private key`, `signature scheme` and `wallet` as synonyms).  

The `Solo` environment implements in-memory Value Tangle ledger to the finest details. 
For example, you can only move tokens in the _Solo_ environment by creating and submitting valid and signed transaction. 
You can also create new wallets on the Value Tangle and request iotas from the faucet to your wallet.

The following code shows how to do it:
```go
func TestTutorial2(t *testing.T) {
	env := solo.New(t, false, false)
	userWallet := env.NewSignatureSchemeWithFunds() // create new wallet with 1337 iotas
	userAddress := userWallet.Address()
	t.Logf("Address of the userWallet is: %s", userAddress)
	numIotas := env.GetAddressBalance(userAddress, balance.ColorIOTA) // how many iotas contains the address
	t.Logf("balance of the userWallet is: %d iota", numIotas)
	env.AssertAddressBalance(userAddress, balance.ColorIOTA, 1337) // assert the address has 1337 iotas
}
```
 The output of the test:
```
=== RUN   TestTutorial2
    tutorial_test.go:32: Address of the userWallet is: RPfqfAKuBFc5dLMqDtshTbRXPJcuyBYLo9WnqMkf6PaU
    tutorial_test.go:34: balance of the userWallet is: 1337 iota
--- PASS: TestTutorial2 (0.00s)
```
 
The token ledger of the Value Tangle in _Solo_ "lives" in the global environment `env`
of the test. It is shared among all chains, deployed on that environment. 
It serves as a medium for transactions between smart contracts on different chains. 
The way _Solo_ makes it possible to test transacting between chains.
 
Note that in the test above we didn’t deploy any chains: the Value Tangle exists 
outside of any chains.

Next: [Creating a chain. Core contracts](03.md)